Astro 4.6.0 article (#1058)
withastro/astro.build: src/content/blog/astro-460.mdx

---
title: "Astro 4.6"

> description: "Astro 4.6 is here! This release includes a new manual routing strategy for internationalization, the ability to move the dev toolbar, experimental support for CSRF protection and more."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "Astro 4.6 is here! This release includes a new manual routing strategy for internationalization, the ability to move the dev toolbar, experimental support for CSRF protection, and more."
```

publishDate: "April 11, 2024"
authors:
  - erika
  - ema
  - matthew
  - nate
  - bjorn
coverImage: "/src/content/blog/_images/astro-460/post-header-4.6.webp"
socialImage: "/src/content/blog/_images/astro-460/og-image-4.6.webp"
lang: "en"
---

import BlogSummary from "/src/components/BlogSummary.astro";

<BlogSummary>
  After a short break post-launch week, Astro 4.6 is now here and we're back to our regular schedule! This release includes a new manual routing strategy for internationalization, experimental support for CSRF protection, a new feature for the dev toolbar and more.
</BlogSummary>

Full release highlights include:

> - [**Manual routing strategy for internationalization**](#manual-routing-strategy-for-internationalization)

Reviewer 2: Node.js policy is missing a link here.

Should it be the first thing? I feel like you want to highlight the positive thing that affects users the most (aka flashy features). I would probably say manual routing strategy.

> - [**Manual routing strategy for internationalization**](#manual-routing-strategy-for-internationalization)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [**Manual i18n routing strategy**](#manual-routing-strategy-for-internationalization)
```
I think for the short bullet point, we could even go with "i18n" and let the section itself use the full word.

- [**Ability to move the dev toolbar**](#ability-to-move-the-dev-toolbar)
- [**Experimental: Support for CSRF protection**](#experimental-support-for-csrf-protection)

> - [**Cookies improvements**](#cookies-improvements)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [**Cookies improvements**](#cookies-improvements)
- [**Deprecated support for older versions of Node](#deprecated-support-for-older-versions-of-node)
```
Agree with Matthew that this could go last. (Which means also moving the paragraph to the end)

To upgrade an existing project, use the automated `@astrojs/upgrade` CLI tool. Alternatively, upgrade manually by running the upgrade command for your package manager:

```sh
# Recommended:
npx @astrojs/upgrade

# Manual:
npm install astro@latest
pnpm upgrade astro --latest
yarn upgrade astro --latest
```

## Deprecated support for older versions of Node

> In accordance with [our Node support and upgrade policy](https://docs.astro.build/en/upgrade-astro/#nodejs-support-and-upgrade-policies), this version of Astro deprecate support for versions of Node lower than 18.17.1, Node 19 and versions of Node lower than 20.3.0. As always, this decision wasn't reached lightly, and we believe this change will result in a more stable and secure Astro experience for all users.
> 
> Astro will still work on these older versions of Node until Astro 5, however you may see a warning when installing Astro and certain features may not work as expected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In accordance with [our Node support and upgrade policy](https://docs.astro.build/en/upgrade-astro/#nodejs-support-and-upgrade-policies), this version of Astro deprecates support for:
- versions of Node lower than 18.17.1
- Node 19 (the odd numbered version)
- versions of Node lower than 20.3.0.	

As described in our support policy, this decision was made after careful consideration of several factors. We believe this change will result in a more stable and secure Astro experience for all users.

Support for these older versions of Node will continue until the next major version of Astro (v5). However, you may see warnings when installing Astro and certain features may not work as expected.
```
Not sure the best way to hit "the odd numbered version" but I think this reads more cleanly if we separate out like this. Adjust to taste!

## Manual routing strategy for internationalization

Astro 4.6 introduces a new manual routing strategy for internationalization. This new strategy allows you to take total control over the routing of your internationalized Astro website, for cases where the default routing strategy doesn't quite meet your needs.

> 

Reviewer 2: I would add a short paragraph, 2 or 3 sentences, explaining how you can use the same helper functions that the other routing strategies use internally, and that you can even use the core middleware, but place it after your own as a way to circumvent the default behaviors.

Reviewer: (You can see the newly updated changeset for an example/description here)

To enable manual routing, set the `i18n.strategy` option in your `astro.config.mjs` to `manual`:

```js
// astro.config.mjs
import { defineConfig } from "astro/config";

export default defineConfig({
  i18n: {
    locales: ["en", "fr"],
    defaultLocale: "fr",
    routing: "manual",
  },
});
```

and then [add a middleware](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/middleware/) to your project to handle the routing:

```ts
// src/middleware.ts
import { redirectToDefaultLocale } from "astro:i18n";

// Example middleware that redirects all requests to the default locale apart for the /about page
export const onRequest = defineMiddleware(async (context, next) => {
  if (context.url.startsWith("/about")) {
    return next();
  } else {
    return redirectToDefaultLocale(context, 302);
  }
});
```

Check out the [internationalization documentation](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/internationalization/) for more information on how to use manual routing with internationalization.

## Ability to move the dev toolbar

> Astro 4.6 introduces the ability to move the dev toolbar to different positions around the screen. This can be useful if you have a sticky header that covers the bottom of the screen, or if you just prefer the toolbar to be somewhere else. Thanks to [Ming-jun Lu](https://github.com/mingjunlu) for contributing this feature!

Reviewer 2: Maybe one example of where you might move it (snap to the top of the screen when you have your own toolbar at the bottom) so it clarifies what it's useful for.

Author: You cannot actually move it to the top. Right now it only supports bottom left and bottom right. There is also an example of why ("..if you have a sticky header that covers the bottom of the screen") in the paragraph. Happy to add another example, though

Reviewer: I ill come in here with a suggestion to *also* not make it sound like it can just go anywhere, and temper people's expectations.  :smile:

> Astro 4.6 introduces the ability to move the dev toolbar to different positions around the screen. This can be useful if you have a sticky header that covers the bottom of the screen, or if you just prefer the toolbar to be somewhere else. Thanks to [Ming-jun Lu](https://github.com/mingjunlu) for contributing this feature!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Astro 4.6 introduces the ability to move the dev toolbar to different positions at the bottom of your screen. This can be useful if you have a sticky header that covers the bottom of the screen, or if you just prefer the toolbar to be somewhere else. The dev toolbar is there to help you, not get in your way! Thanks to [Ming-jun Lu](https://github.com/mingjunlu) for contributing this requested feature!
```
Slight adjustment here so people aren't expecting they can put it anywhere they want. And... a totally gratuitous sentence for fun!

> ## Experimental: Support for CSRF protection

Reviewer: This has also changed, and the changeset has the up to date description and example! Also happy for Erika to revise based on this, and will look again afterwards!

> Astro 4.6 adds experimental partial support for [CSRF protection](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/CSRF). This feature is currently under an experimental flag and may change in future releases. To enable it, set the `experimental.csrfProtection` and `security.csrfProtection.origin` option in your `astro.config.mjs`:

Reviewer 2: From @ematipico's PR I think it's now `experimental.security.csrfProtection`.

Reviewer 3: Sorry for the last minute change Erika

Author: No worries, it happens!

```js
// astro.config.mjs
import { defineConfig } from "astro/config";

export default defineConfig({
  security: {
    csrfProtection: {
      origin: true,
    },
  },
  experimental: {
    csrfProtection: true,
  },
});
```

Note that this feature is only available for pages that are rendered on-demand (also known as Server Side Rendering).

## Cookies improvements

> Thanks to [Farzard](https://github.com/fshafiee), Astro's Cookie helper for deleting cookies (`Astro.cookies.delete`) now allowing setting all the standard cookie attributes instead of just the `path` and `domain` attributes. Perhaps small change, but definitely a useful one!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thanks to [Farzard](https://github.com/fshafiee), Astro's helper for deleting cookies (`Astro.cookies.delete`) now allowing setting even more cookie attributes instead of just the `path` and `domain` attributes. Perhaps a "bite-sized" change, but definitely one you can sink your teeth into!
```
Once again, Sarah tries to be fun.

But IMPORTANT, this does only adds certain, explicit attributes, not "all of them" necessarily. So better to keep the description scoped.

lang: "en"
---

import BlogSummary from "/src/components/BlogSummary.astro";

<BlogSummary>
  After a short break post-launch week, Astro 4.6 is now here and we're back to our regular schedule! This release includes a new manual routing strategy for internationalization, experimental support for CSRF protection, a new feature for the dev toolbar and more.
</BlogSummary>

Full release highlights include:

- [**Manual i18n routing strategy**](#manual-routing-strategy-for-internationalization)
- [**Ability to move the dev toolbar**](#ability-to-move-the-dev-toolbar)
- [**Experimental: Support for CSRF protection**](#experimental-support-for-csrf-protection)
- [**Cookies improvements**](#cookies-improvements)
- [**Deprecated support for older versions of Node](#deprecated-support-for-older-versions-of-node)

To upgrade an existing project, use the automated `@astrojs/upgrade` CLI tool. Alternatively, upgrade manually by running the upgrade command for your package manager:

```sh
# Recommended:
npx @astrojs/upgrade

# Manual:
npm install astro@latest
pnpm upgrade astro --latest
yarn upgrade astro --latest
```

## Deprecated support for older versions of Node

> In accordance with [our Node support and upgrade policy](https://docs.astro.build/en/upgrade-astro/#nodejs-support-and-upgrade-policies), this version of Astro deprecate support for versions of Node lower than 18.17.1, Node 19 and versions of Node lower than 20.3.0. As always, this decision wasn't reached lightly, and we believe this change will result in a more stable and secure Astro experience for all users.

Reviewer 3: I would change all the instances of the word "Node" to "Node.js", because it's the official and correct name of the project.

Astro will still work on these older versions of Node until Astro 5, however you may see a warning when installing Astro and certain features may not work as expected.

## Manual routing strategy for internationalization

Astro 4.6 introduces a new manual routing strategy for internationalization. This new strategy allows you to take total control over the routing of your internationalized Astro website, for cases where the default routing strategy doesn't quite meet your needs.

To enable manual routing, set the `i18n.strategy` option in your `astro.config.mjs` to `manual`:

```js
// astro.config.mjs
import { defineConfig } from "astro/config";

export default defineConfig({
  i18n: {
    locales: ["en", "fr"],
    defaultLocale: "fr",
    routing: "manual",
  },
});
```

and then [add a middleware](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/middleware/) to your project to handle the routing:

```ts

> // src/middleware.ts
> import { redirectToDefaultLocale } from "astro:i18n";

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
// src/middleware.ts
import { redirectToDefaultLocale } from "astro:i18n";
import { defineMiddleware } from "astro:middleware";
```

    return next();
  } else {
    return redirectToDefaultLocale(context, 302);
  }
});
```

Check out the [internationalization documentation](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/internationalization/) for more information on how to use manual routing with internationalization.

## Ability to move the dev toolbar

Astro 4.6 introduces the ability to move the dev toolbar to different positions at the bottom of your screen. This can be useful if you have a sticky header that covers the bottom of the screen, or if you just prefer the toolbar to be somewhere else. The dev toolbar is there to help you, not get in your way! Thanks to [Ming-jun Lu](https://github.com/mingjunlu) for contributing this requested feature!

## Experimental: Support for CSRF protection

Astro 4.6 adds experimental partial support for [CSRF protection](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/CSRF). This feature is currently under an experimental flag and may change in future releases. To enable it, set the `experimental.csrfProtection` and `security.csrfProtection.origin` option in your `astro.config.mjs`:

```js
// astro.config.mjs
import { defineConfig } from "astro/config";

> export default defineConfig({
>   security: {
>     csrfProtection: {
>       origin: true,
>     },
>   },
>   experimental: {
>     csrfProtection: true,
>   },
> });

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
export default defineConfig({
  experimental: {
    security: {
      csrfProtection: {
        origin: true,
      },
    },
  },
});
```

```

> Note that this feature is only available for pages that are rendered on-demand (also known as Server Side Rendering).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that this feature is only available for pages that are rendered on-demand (also known as Server Side Rendering) or hybrid pages that opt-out from prerendering.
```

---
title: "Astro 4.6"
description: "Astro 4.6 is here! This release includes a new manual routing strategy for internationalization, the ability to move the dev toolbar, experimental support for CSRF protection, and more."
publishDate: "April 11, 2024"
authors:
  - erika
  - ema
  - matthew
  - nate
  - bjorn
coverImage: "/src/content/blog/_images/astro-460/post-header-4.6.webp"
socialImage: "/src/content/blog/_images/astro-460/og-image-4.6.webp"
lang: "en"
---

import BlogSummary from "/src/components/BlogSummary.astro";

<BlogSummary>

>   After a short break post-launch week, Astro 4.6 is now here and we're back to our regular schedule! This release includes a new manual routing strategy for internationalization, experimental support for CSRF protection, a new feature for the dev toolbar and more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  After a short break post-launch week, Astro 4.6 is now here and we're back to our regular schedule! This release includes a new manual routing strategy for internationalization, experimental support for CSRF protection, a new feature for the dev toolbar, and more.
```

</BlogSummary>

Full release highlights include:

- [**Manual i18n routing strategy**](#manual-routing-strategy-for-internationalization)
- [**Ability to move the dev toolbar**](#ability-to-move-the-dev-toolbar)
- [**Experimental: Support for CSRF protection**](#experimental-support-for-csrf-protection)
- [**Cookies improvements**](#cookies-improvements)

> - [**Deprecated support for older versions of Node.js**](#deprecated-support-for-older-versions-of-node)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [**Deprecated support for older versions of Node.js**](#deprecated-support-for-older-versions-of-nodejs)
```

To upgrade an existing project, use the automated `@astrojs/upgrade` CLI tool. Alternatively, upgrade manually by running the upgrade command for your package manager:

```sh
# Recommended:
npx @astrojs/upgrade

# Manual:
npm install astro@latest
pnpm upgrade astro --latest
yarn upgrade astro --latest
```

## Manual routing strategy for internationalization

> Astro 4.6 introduces a new manual routing strategy for internationalization. This new strategy allows you to take total control over the routing of your internationalized Astro website, for cases where the default routing strategy doesn't quite meet your needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Astro 4.6 introduces a manual routing strategy for internationalization. This new strategy allows you to take total control over the routing of your internationalized Astro website, for cases where the default routing strategy doesn't quite meet your needs.
```
said "new" twice!

> To enable manual routing, set the `i18n.strategy` option in your `astro.config.mjs` to `manual`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable manual routing, set the `i18n.routing` option in your `astro.config.mjs` to `manual`:
```

```js
// astro.config.mjs
import { defineConfig } from "astro/config";

export default defineConfig({
  i18n: {
    locales: ["en", "fr"],
    defaultLocale: "fr",
    routing: "manual",
  },
});
```

and then [add a middleware](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/middleware/) to your project to handle the routing:

```ts
// src/middleware.ts
import { defineMiddleware } from "astro:middleware";
import { redirectToDefaultLocale } from "astro:i18n";

// Example middleware that redirects all requests to the default locale apart for the /about page
export const onRequest = defineMiddleware(async (context, next) => {
  if (context.url.startsWith("/about")) {
    return next();
  } else {
    return redirectToDefaultLocale(context, 302);
  }
});
```

> Alternatively, you can import `middleware` from `astro:i18n` to build upon the default routing strategy:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you can import Astro's own middleware logic using the new `middleware` function from `astro:i18n` to build upon the default routing strategy:
```

```js title="src/middleware.js"
import { defineMiddleware, sequence } from "astro:middleware";
import { middleware } from "astro:i18n"; // Astro's own i18n routing middleware

export const userMiddleware = defineMiddleware(() => {
	// Your custom middleware logic here
});

export const onRequest = sequence(
  userMiddleware,
  middleware({
    redirectToDefaultLocale: false,
    prefixDefaultLocale: true
  })
)
```

Check out the [internationalization documentation](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/internationalization/) for more information on how to use manual routing with internationalization.

## Ability to move the dev toolbar

Astro 4.6 introduces the ability to move the dev toolbar to different positions at the bottom of your screen. This can be useful if you have a sticky header that covers the bottom of the screen, or if you just prefer the toolbar to be somewhere else. The dev toolbar is there to help you, not get in your way! Thanks to [Ming-jun Lu](https://github.com/mingjunlu) for contributing this requested feature!

## Experimental: Support for CSRF protection

> Astro 4.6 adds experimental partial support for [CSRF protection](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/CSRF). This feature is currently under an experimental flag and may change in future releases. To enable it, set the `experimental.security.csrfProtection` option in your `astro.config.mjs`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Astro 4.6 adds experimental partial support for [CSRF protection](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/CSRF). This feature is currently under an experimental flag and may change in future releases. 

To enable it, set the `experimental.security.csrfProtection` option in your `astro.config.mjs`:
```

```js
// astro.config.mjs
import { defineConfig } from "astro/config";

export default defineConfig({
  experimental: {
    security: {
      csrfProtection: {
        origin: true,
      },
    },
  },
});
```

> Enabling this setting make Astro perform a check that the "origin" header, automatically passed by all modern browsers, matches the URL sent by each `Request`. If it doesn't, Astro will respond with a `403 Forbidden` status code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enabling this setting makes Astro perform a check that the "origin" header, automatically passed by all modern browsers, matches the URL sent by each `Request`. If it doesn't, Astro will respond with a `403 Forbidden` status code.
```

> Note that this feature is only available for pages that are rendered on-demand (also known as Server Side Rendering).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that this feature is only available for pages that are rendered on-demand (also known as server-side rendering).
```

## Cookies improvements

> Thanks to [Farzard](https://github.com/fshafiee), Astro's helper for deleting cookies (`Astro.cookies.delete`) now allowing setting even more cookie attributes instead of just the `path` and `domain` attributes. Perhaps a "bite-sized" change, but definitely one you can sink your teeth into!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thanks to [Farzard](https://github.com/fshafiee), Astro's helper for deleting cookies (`Astro.cookies.delete`) now allows setting even more cookie attributes instead of just the `path` and `domain` attributes. Perhaps a "bite-sized" change, but definitely one you can sink your teeth into!
```

## Deprecated support for older versions of Node.js

In accordance with [our Node.js support and upgrade policy](https://docs.astro.build/en/upgrade-astro/#nodejs-support-and-upgrade-policies), this version of Astro deprecates support for:

- versions of Node.js 18 lower than 18.17.1
- Node.js 19 (the odd numbered version)
- versions of Node.js 20 lower than 20.3.0.

As described in our support policy, this decision was made after careful consideration of several factors. We believe this change will result in a more stable and secure Astro experience for all users.

Support for these older versions of Node.js will continue until the next major version of Astro (v5). However, you may see warnings when installing Astro and certain features may not work as expected.

## Bug Fixes

> You know it, Astro 4.6 includes more bug fixes and smaller improvements that couldn't make it into this release post. Check out the full [release notes](https://github.com/withastro/astro/blob/refs/heads/main/packages/astro/CHANGELOG.md#460) to learn more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You know it, Astro 4.6 includes more bug fixes and smaller improvements that couldn't make it into this release post! Check out the full [release notes](https://github.com/withastro/astro/blob/refs/heads/main/packages/astro/CHANGELOG.md#460) to learn more.
```

Note that this feature is only available for pages that are rendered on-demand (also known as server-side rendering).

## Cookies improvements

Thanks to [Farzard](https://github.com/fshafiee), Astro's helper for deleting cookies (`Astro.cookies.delete`) now allows setting even more cookie attributes instead of just the `path` and `domain` attributes. Perhaps a "bite-sized" change, but definitely one you can sink your teeth into!

## Deprecated support for older versions of Node.js

In accordance with [our Node.js support and upgrade policy](https://docs.astro.build/en/upgrade-astro/#nodejs-support-and-upgrade-policies), this version of Astro deprecates support for:

- versions of Node.js 18 lower than 18.17.1
- Node.js 19 (the odd numbered version)
- versions of Node.js 20 lower than 20.3.0.

As described in our support policy, this decision was made after careful consideration of several factors. We believe this change will result in a more stable and secure Astro experience for all users.

> Support for these older versions of Node.js will continue until the next major version of Astro (v5). However, you may see warnings when installing Astro and certain features may not work as expected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can continue to use deprecated versions of Node.js until they are removed in the next major version of Astro (v5). However, you may see warnings when installing Astro and certain features may not work as expected.
```

Author: Perfect, thank you!
